THE TOP TEN WAYS A COMPUTER GUY CAN IMPRESS HIS DATE
  10. Flash the big wads of tens and twenties you created with your
color laser printer and top-notch graphics program.
  9. Spend an evening playing floppy disks backward, listening for the
secret messages about Satan.
  8. Invite her back to your place to show her the etchings on your
Newton MessagePad.
  7. Let the lady go first when you reach the virtual reality escalator.
  6. Serenade her with your MIDI-compatible drum pads.
  5. Have your dinner illuminated by the soft glow of an active-matrix
LCD panel.
  4. If you're getting serious, consider a set of "his 'n' her" system
unit keys.
  3. Drive her crazy by murmuring tender love words with the help of a
French-speaking voice synthesizer.
  2. Never type on your date's laptop computer without permission,
particularly if the system is on her lap.
AND THE #1 WAY A COMPUTER GUY CAN IMPRESS HIS DATE:
  1. When things get tough, simply ask yourself, "What would Bill Gates
do in a situation like this?
(remember, this is a complete list, compiled by another person, not an
add-to-it-yourself list like in Top Ten>)
Your positive action combined with positive thinking results in success.
Live life to the fullest, and focus on the positive.
Only I can change my life. No one can do it for me.
I always like to look on the optimistic side of life, but I am realistic enough to know that life is a complex matter.
Dream as if you'll live forever, live as if you'll die today.
Doing what you like is freedom. Liking what you do is happiness.
Be happy with what you have. Be excited about what you want.
Life is a journey, and if you fall in love with the journey, you will be in love forever.
I've learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will never forget how you made them feel.
Much of the stress that people feel doesn't come from having too much to do. It comes from not finishing what they've started.
We forge the chains we wear in life.
If you look to others for fulfillment, you will never be fulfilled. If your happiness depends on money, you will never be happy with yourself. Be content with what you have; rejoice in the way things are. When you realize there is nothing lacking, the world belongs to you.
Everything is a gift of the universe--even joy, anger, jealously, frustration, or separateness. Everything is perfect either for our growth or our enjoyment.
There is no such thing as a problem without a gift for you in its hands. You seek problems because you need their gifts.
If you want to be happy, set a goal that commands your thoughts, liberates your energy, and inspires your hopes.
Tension is who you think you should be, relaxation is who you are.
For me it is sufficient to have a corner by my hearth, a book, and a friend, and a nap undisturbed by creditors or grief. Fernandez de Andrada
You cannot judge what should bring others joy, and others cannot judge what should bring you joy.
The art of living lies less in eliminating our troubles than growing with them.
Our capacity to draw happiness from aesthetic objects or material goods in fact seems critically dependent on our first satisfying a more important range of emotional or psychological needs, among them the need for understanding, for love, expression and respect. A
If you start to think the problem is 'out there,' stop yourself. That thought is the problem.
Happiness cannot be traveled to, owned, earned, worn or consumed. Happiness is the spiritual experience of living every minute with love, grace, and gratitude.
Happiness is not a station you arrive at, but a manner of traveling.
Security is when everything is settled, when nothing can happen to you; security is the denial of life.
Focus on the journey, not the destination. Joy is found not in finishing an activity but in doing it.
Thousands of candles can be lit from a single candle, and the life of the candle will not be shortened. Happiness never decreases by being shared.
The best remedy for those who are afraid, lonely or unhappy is to go outside, somewhere where they can be quiet, alone with the heavens, nature and God. As long as this exists, and it certainly always will, then there will be comfort for every sorrow, whatever the circumstances may be.
In our lives, change is unavoidable, loss is unavoidable. In the adaptability and ease with which we experience change, lies our happiness and freedom.
Live with intention. Walk to the edge. Listen hard. Practice wellness. Play with abandon. Laugh. Choose with no regret. Do what you love. Live as if this is all there is.
You never regret being kind.
They who can give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety, deserve neither liberty nor safety. Ben Franklin
Forgiveness does not change the past, but it does enlarge the future.
The secret of health for both mind and body is not to mourn for the past, worry about the future, or anticipate troubles, but to live in the present moment wisely and earnestly.
True happiness is not attained through self-gratification, but through fidelity to a worthy purpose. Helen Keller
Money is neither my god nor my devil. It is a form of energy that tends to make us more of who we already are, whether it's greedy or loving.
The need for forgiveness is an illusion. There is nothing to forgive.
Blessed are those who can give without remembering and take without forgetting.
Reflect upon you present blessings, of which every man has many--not on your past misfortunes, of which all men have some.
Even a happy life cannot be without a measure of darkness, and the word happy would lose its meaning if it were not balanced by sadness. It is far better to take things as they come along with patience and equanimity.
He who lives in harmony with himself lives in harmony with the universe.
If you want others to be happy, practice compassion. If you want to be happy, practice compassion.
When one door of happiness closes, another opens, but often we look so long at the closed door that we do not see the one that has been opened for us.
Happiness is not having what you want. It is appreciating what you have.
True happiness...arises, in the first place, from the enjoyment of one's self.
Happiness is that state of consciousness which proceeds from the achievement of one's values.
Most of us are just about as happy as we make up our minds to be.
Success is getting what you want. Happiness is wanting what you get.
We can have peace if we let go of wanting to change the past and wanting to control the future.
We make a living by what we get, we make a life by what we give.
Money doesn't bring happiness and creativity. Your creativity and happiness brings money. Sam Rosen
Happiness is the experience of loving life. Being happy is being in love with that momentary experience. And love is looking at someone or even something and seeing the absolute best in him/her or it. Love is happiness with what you see. So love and happiness really are the same thing...just expressed differently.
Everything that irritates us about others can lead us to an understanding of ourselves.
God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the difference.
I am not bound to win, I am bound to be true. I am not bound to succeed, but I am bound to live up to the light I have.
Gratitude unlocks the fullness of life. It turns what we have into enough, and more. It turns denial into acceptance, chaos to order, confusion to clarity. It can turn a meal into a feast, a house into a home, a stranger into a friend. Gratitude makes sense of our past, brings peace for today, and creates a vision for tomorrow.
There is no stress in the world, only people thinking stressful thoughts and then acting on them.
We all get report cards in many different ways, but the real excitement of what you're doing is in the doing of it. It's not what you're gonna get in the end-it's not the final curtain-it's really in the doing it, and loving what you're doing.
In the midst of movement and chaos, keep stillness inside of you.
Success at the highest level comes down to one question: Can you decide that your happiness can come from someone else's success?
If you can, you take the most important step towards becoming a great leader.
There is only one thing more painful than learning from experience and that is not learning from experience.
Once you do something you love, you never have to work again.
Anything in life that we don't accept will simply make trouble for us until we make peace with it.
The right way is not always the popular and easy way. Standing for right when it is unpopular is a true test of moral character.
Persons of high self-esteem are not driven to make themselves superior to others; they do not seek to prove their value by measuring themselves against a comparative standard. Their joy is being who they are, not in being better than someone else.
Anxiety is the dizziness of freedom.
Do what you have always done and you'll get what you have always got.
The happiness of life is made up of the little charities of a kiss or smile, a kind look, a heartfelt compliment.
We avoid the things that we're afraid of because we think there will be dire consequences if we confront them. But the truly dire consequences in our lives come from avoiding things that we need to learn about or discover.
Think of what you have rather than of what you lack. Of the things you have, select the best and then reflect how eagerly you would have sought them if you did not have them.
Happiness is where we find it, but very rarely where we seek it.
To be content means that you realize you contain what you seek. Alan Cohen
The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.
In our daily lives, we must see that it is not happiness that makes us grateful, but the gratefulness that makes us happy.
Look at everything as though you were seeing it either for the first or last time. Then your time on earth will be filled with glory.
You are responsible for your life. You can't keep blaming somebody else for your dysfunction. Life is really about moving on.
Expecting life to treat you well because you are a good person is like expecting an angry bull not to charge because you are a vegetarian.
View your life from your funeral, looking back at your life experiences, what have you accomplished? What would you have wanted to accomplish but didn't? What were the happy moments? What were the sad? What would you do again, and what you wouldn't?
Far better is it to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs-even though checkered by failure-than to rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy much nor suffer much, because they live in a gray twilight that knows not victory nor defeat.
Boredom is the feeling that everything is a waste of time...serenity, that nothing is.
Life has many ways of testing a person’s will, either by having nothing happen at all or by having everything happen all at once.
There are two ways of spreading light: to be the candle, or the mirror that reflects it
With everything that has happened to you, you can either feel sorry for yourself or treat what has happened as a gift. Everything is either an opportunity to grow or an obstacle to keep you from growing. You get to choose.
Believe in yourself! Have faith in your abilities! Without a humble but reasonable confidence in your own powers you cannot be successful or happy.
Hate. It has caused a lot of problems in this world but has not solved one yet.
If opportunity doesn’t knock, build a door.
An attitude of positive expectation is the mark of the superior personality.
Success consists of going from failure to failure without loss of enthusiasm.
If you can dream it, then you can achieve it. You will get all you want in life if you help enough other people get what they want.
The only place where your dream becomes impossible is in your own thinking.
We don’t see things as they are, we see them as we are.
Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time.
I may not have gone where I intended to go, but I think I have ended up where I needed to be.
Learning is a gift. Even when pain is your teacher.
I’ve had a lot of worries in my life, most of which never happened.
You yourself, as much as anybody in the entire universe, deserve your love and affection.
Hope is a waking dream.
The past has no power over the present moment.
Happiness is an attitude. We either make ourselves miserable, or happy and strong. The amount of work is the same.
I do believe we’re all connected. I do believe in positive energy. I do believe in the power of prayer. I do believe in putting good out into the world. And I believe in taking care of each other.
If you want light to come into your life, you need to stand where it is shining.
Today is a new beginning, a chance to turn your failures into achievements & your sorrows into so goods. No room for excuses.
Life is a gift, and it offers us the privilege, opportunity, and responsibility to give something back by becoming more.
We are all here for some special reason. Stop being a prisoner of your past. Become the architect of your future.
If you think you can do a thing or think you can’t do a thing, you’re right.
No matter what the situation, remind yourself I have a choice.
All you can change is yourself, but sometimes that changes everything!
The will to win, the desire to succeed, the urge to reach your full potential… these are the keys that will unlock the door to personal excellence.
If we’re growing, we’re always going to be out of our comfort zone.
Take chances, make mistakes. That’s how you grow. Pain nourishes your courage. You have to fail in order to practice being brave.
I am the greatest, I said that even before I knew I was.
We are responsible for what we are, and whatever we wish ourselves to be, we have the power to make ourselves.
The difference between stumbling blocks and stepping stones is how you use them.
If someone tells you, You can’t  they really mean, I can’t.
There is little difference in people, but that little difference makes a big difference. The little difference is attitude. The big difference is whether it is positive or negative.
Whatever you want to do, do it now. There are only so many tomorrows.
When I do good, I feel good. When I do bad, I feel bad. That’s my religion.
The difference in winning and losing is most often…not quitting.
You are never too old to set another goal or dream a new dream.
All things are difficult before they are easy.
Success is falling nine times and getting up ten.
Happiness, like unhappiness, is a proactive choice.
Be soft. Do not let the world make you hard. Do not let pain make you hate. Do not let the bitterness steal your sweetness. Take pride that even though the rest of the world may disagree, you still believe it to be a beautiful place.
You must make a decision that you are going to move on. It wont happen automatically. You will have to rise up and say, ‘I don’t care how hard this is, I don’t care how disappointed I am, I’m not going to let this get the best of me. I’m moving on with my life.
The next time you feel slightly uncomfortable with the pressure in your life, remember no pressure, no diamonds. Pressure is a part of success.
When the world pushes you to your knees, you’re in the perfect position to pray.
If you can change your mind, you can change your life.
When we are no longer able to change a situation, we are challenged to change ourselves.
Happiness often sneaks in through a door you didn’t know you left open.
The best way to gain self-confidence is to do what you are afraid to do.
  Life is about making an impact, not making an income. Whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe, it can achieve. Strive not to be a success, but rather to be of value.  Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—I took the one less traveled by, And that has made all the difference. 
I attribute my success to this: I never gave or took any excuse. 
You miss 100% of the shots you don’t take. I've missed more than 9000 shots in my career. I've lost almost 300 games. 26 times I've been trusted to take the game winning shot and missed. I've failed over and over and over again in my life. And that is why I succeed. –Michael Jordan
The most difficult thing is the decision to act, the rest is merely tenacity. 
Every strike brings me closer to the next home run. 
Definiteness of purpose is the starting point of all achievement.
Life isn't about getting and having, it's about giving and being. 
Life is what happens to you while you’re busy making other plans. 
We become what we think about. 
Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by the things that you didn’t do than by the ones you did do, so throw off the bowlines, sail away from safe harbor, catch the trade winds in your sails.  Explore, Dream, Discover. 
Life is 10% what happens to me and 90% of how I react to it. 
The most common way people give up their power is by thinking they don’t have any. 
The mind is everything. What you think you become. 
 The best time to plant a tree was 20 years ago. The second best time is now. 
 An unexamined life is not worth living. 
 Eighty percent of success is showing up. 
 Your time is limited, so don’t waste it living someone else’s life.
 Winning isn’t everything, but wanting to win is. 
 I am not a product of my circumstances. I am a product of my decisions. 
 Every child is an artist.  The problem is how to remain an artist once he grows up. 
 You can never cross the ocean until you have the courage to lose sight of the shore. 
 I’ve learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will never forget how you made them feel. 
 Either you run the day, or the day runs you. 
 Whether you think you can or you think you can’t, you’re right
 The two most important days in your life are the day you are born and the day you find out why. –
 Whatever you can do, or dream you can, begin it.  Boldness has genius, power and magic in it. 
 The best revenge is massive success. 
 People often say that motivation doesn’t last. Well, neither does bathing.  That’s why we recommend it daily. 
 Life shrinks or expands in proportion to one's courage. 
If you hear a voice within you say “you cannot paint,” then by all means paint and that voice will be silenced. 
 There is only one way to avoid criticism: do nothing, say nothing, and be nothing. –Aristotle
 Ask and it will be given to you; search, and you will find; knock and the door will be opened for you. 
 The only person you are destined to become is the person you decide to be. 
 Go confidently in the direction of your dreams.  Live the life you have imagined. 
 When I stand before God at the end of my life, I would hope that I would not have a single bit of talent left and could say, I used everything you gave me. 
 Few things can help an individual more than to place responsibility on him, and to let him know that you trust him.  
Subscribe To The Forbes Careers Newsletter 
Sign up here to get top career advice delivered straight to your inbox every week.
 Certain things catch your eye, but pursue only those that capture the heart.
 Believe you can and you’re halfway there. 
 Everything you’ve ever wanted is on the other side of fear. 
 We can easily forgive a child who is afraid of the dark; the real tragedy of life is when men are afraid of the light. 
 Teach thy tongue to say, "I do not know," and thous shalt progress. 
 Start where you are. Use what you have.  Do what you can. 
 When I was 5 years old, my mother always told me that happiness was the key to life.  When I went to school, they asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up.  I wrote down ‘happy’.  They told me I didn’t understand the assignment, and I told them they didn’t understand life. 
 Fall seven times and stand up eight. 
 When one door of happiness closes, another opens, but often we look so long at the closed door that we do not see the one that has been opened for us. 
 Everything has beauty, but not everyone can see. 
 How wonderful it is that nobody need wait a single moment before starting to improve the world. 
 When I let go of what I am, I become what I might be. 
 Life is not measured by the number of breaths we take, but by the moments that take our breath away. 
 Happiness is not something readymade.  It comes from your own actions. 
 If you're offered a seat on a rocket ship, don't ask what seat! Just get on. 
 First, have a definite, clear practical ideal; a goal, an objective. Second, have the necessary means to achieve your ends; wisdom, money, materials, and methods. Third, adjust all your means to that end. 
If the wind will not serve, take to the oars. 
 You can’t fall if you don’t climb.  But there’s no joy in living your whole life on the ground. 
 We must believe that we are gifted for something, and that this thing, at whatever cost, must be attained. 
 Too many of us are not living our dreams because we are living our fears. 
 Challenges are what make life interesting and overcoming them is what makes life meaningful. 
 If you want to lift yourself up, lift up someone else.
 I have been impressed with the urgency of doing. Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Being willing is not enough; we must do. 
 Limitations live only in our minds.  But if we use our imaginations, our possibilities become limitless. 
 You take your life in your own hands, and what happens? A terrible thing, no one to blame. 
 What’s money? A man is a success if he gets up in the morning and goes to bed at night and in between does what he wants to do. 
 I didn’t fail the test. I just found 100 ways to do it wrong. 
 In order to succeed, your desire for success should be greater than your fear of failure. 
 A person who never made a mistake never tried anything new. 
 The person who says it cannot be done should not interrupt the person who is doing it. 
 There are no traffic jams along the extra mile.
 It is never too late to be what you might have been. 
 You become what you believe. 
 I would rather die of passion than of boredom. 
 A truly rich man is one whose children run into his arms when his hands are empty. 
 It is not what you do for your children, but what you have taught them to do for themselves, that will make them successful human beings.  
 If you want your children to turn out well, spend twice as much time with them, and half as much money. 
 Build your own dreams, or someone else will hire you to build theirs. 
 The battles that count aren't the ones for gold medals. The struggles within yourself--the invisible battles inside all of us--that's where it's at. 
 Education costs money.  But then so does ignorance. 
 I have learned over the years that when one's mind is made up, this diminishes fear. 
 It does not matter how slowly you go as long as you do not stop. 